# THE DESIGN AND USE OF ALGORITHMS FOR PERMUTING LARGE ENTRIES TO THE DIAGONAL OF SPARSE MATRICES* 

IAIN S. DUFF ${ }^{\dagger}$ AND JACKO KOSTER ${ }^{\ddagger}$


#### Abstract

We consider techniques for permuting a sparse matrix so that the diagonal of the permuted matrix has entries of large absolute value. We discuss various criteria for this and consider their implementation as computer codes. We then indicate several cases where such a permutation can be useful. These include the solution of sparse equations by a direct method and by an iterative technique. We also consider its use in generating a preconditioner for an iterative method. We see that the effect of these reorderings can be dramatic although the best a priori strategy is by no means clear.


Key words. sparse matrices, maximum transversal, direct methods, iterative methods, preconditioning

AMS subject classifications. 65F05, 65F50

PII. S0895479897317661

1. Introduction. We study algorithms for the permutation of a square unsymmetric sparse matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ of order $n$ so that the diagonal of the permuted matrix has large entries. This can be useful in several ways. If we wish to solve the system

$$
A x=b
$$

where $\boldsymbol{A}$ is a nonsingular square matrix of order $n$ and $\boldsymbol{x}$ and $\boldsymbol{b}$ are vectors of length $n$, then a preordering to place large entries on the diagonal can be useful whether direct or iterative methods are used for solution.

For direct methods, putting large entries on the diagonal suggests that pivoting down the diagonal might be more stable. There is, of course, nothing rigorous in this and indeed stability is not guaranteed. However, if we have a solution scheme like the multifrontal method of Duff and Reid [10], where a symbolic phase chooses the initial pivotal sequence and the subsequent factorization phase then modifies this sequence for stability, the modification required may be less than if the permutation were not applied.

For iterative methods, simple techniques like Jacobi or Gauss-Seidel converge more quickly if the diagonal entry is large relative to the off-diagonals in its row or column and techniques like block iterative methods can benefit if the entries in the diagonal blocks are large. Additionally, for preconditioning techniques, for example, for diagonal preconditioning or incomplete LU preconditioning, it is intuitively evident that large diagonals should be beneficial.

We consider more precisely what we mean by such permutations in section 2, and we discuss algorithms for performing them and implementation issues in section 3. We consider the effect of these permutations when using direct methods of solution in section 4 and their use with iterative methods in sections 5 and 6 , discussing the effect

[^0]on preconditioning in the latter section. Finally, we consider some of the implications of this current work in section 7.

Throughout, the symbol $|x|$ should be interpreted in context. If $x$ is a scalar, the modulus is intended; if $x$ is a set, then the cardinality, or number of entries in the set, is understood.

## 2. Permuting a matrix to have large diagonals.

2.1. Transversals and maximum transversals. We say that an $n \times n$ matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ has a large diagonal if the absolute value of each diagonal entry is large relative to the absolute values of the off-diagonal entries in its row and column. We will be concerned with permuting the rows and columns of the matrix so the resulting diagonal of the permuted matrix has this property. That is, for the permuted matrix, we would like the ratio

$$
\frac{\left|a_{j j}\right|}{\max _{i \neq j}\left|a_{i j}\right|}
$$

to be large for all $j, 1 \leq j \leq n$. Of course, it is not even possible to ensure that this ratio is greater than 1.0 for all $j$ as the simple example $\left(\begin{array}{ll}1 & 2 \\ 2 & 3\end{array}\right)$ shows. It is thus necessary to scale the matrix before computing the permutation. An appropriate scaling would be to scale the columns so that the largest entry in each column is 1.0 . The algorithm that we describe in section 2.2 would then have the effect of maximizing (2.1).

For an arbitrary nonsingular $n \times n$ matrix, it is a necessary and sufficient condition that for a set of $n$ entries to be permuted to the diagonal, no two can be in the same row and no two can be in the same column. Such a set of entries is termed a maximum transversal, a concept that will be central to this paper and which we now define more rigorously.

We let $T$ denote a set of (at most $n$ ) ordered index pairs ( $i, j$ ), $1 \leq i, j \leq n$, in which each row index $i$ and each column index $j$ appears at most once. $T$ is called a transversal for matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ if $a_{i j} \neq 0$ for each $(i, j) \in T . T$ is called a maximum transversal if it has largest possible cardinality. $|T|$ is equal to $n$ if the matrix is nonsingular. If indeed $|T|=n$, then $T$ defines an $n \times n$ permutation matrix $\boldsymbol{P}$ with

$$
\begin{cases}p_{i j}=1 & \text { for }(i, j) \in T \\ p_{i j}=0 & \text { otherwise }\end{cases}
$$

so that $\boldsymbol{P}^{T} \boldsymbol{A}$ is the matrix with the transversal entries on the diagonal.
In sparse system solution, a major use of transversal algorithms is in the first stage of permuting matrices to block triangular form. The matrix is first permuted by an unsymmetric permutation to make its diagonal zero-free, after which a symmetric permutation is used to obtain the block triangular form. An important feature of this approach is that the block triangular form does not depend on which transversal is found in the first stage [6]. A maximum transversal is also required in the generalization of the block triangular ordering developed by [17].
2.2. Bottleneck transversals. We will consider two strategies for obtaining a maximum transversal with large transversal entries. The primary strategy that we consider in this paper is to maximize the smallest value on the diagonal of the permuted matrix. That is, we compute a maximum transversal $T$ such that for any other maximum transversal $T_{1}$ we have

$$
\min _{(i, j) \in T_{1}}\left|a_{i j}\right| \leq \min _{(i, j) \in T}\left|a_{i j}\right|
$$

Transversal $T$ is called a bottleneck transversal, ${ }^{1}$ and the smallest value $\left|a_{i j}\right|,(i, j) \in T$, is called the bottleneck value of $\boldsymbol{A}$. Equivalently, if $|T|=n$, the smallest value on the diagonal of $\boldsymbol{P}^{T} \boldsymbol{A}$ is maximized over all permutations $\boldsymbol{P}$ and equals the bottleneck value of $\boldsymbol{A}$.

An outline of an algorithm that computes a bottleneck transversal $T^{\prime}$ for a matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ is given below. We assume that we already have an algorithm for obtaining a maximum transversal and denote by $M T(A, T)$ a routine that returns a maximum transversal for a matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$, starting with the initial "guess" transversal $T$. We let $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$ denote the matrix that is obtained by setting to zero in $\boldsymbol{A}$ all entries $a_{i j}$ for which $\left|a_{i j}\right|<\epsilon$ (thus $\left.\boldsymbol{A}_{0}=\boldsymbol{A}\right)$ and $T_{\epsilon}$ denote the transversal obtained by removing from transversal $T$ all the elements $(i, j)$ for which $\left|a_{i j}\right|<\epsilon$ (thus $T_{0}=T$ ).

Algorithm BT.

```
Initialization:
Set $\epsilon$ min to zero and $\epsilon$ max to infinity.
$M:=M T(A, \emptyset)$;
$T^{\prime}:=M$;
while (there exist $i, j$ such that $\epsilon \min <\left|a_{i j}\right|<\epsilon \max$ ) do
begin
    choose $\epsilon=\left|a_{i j}\right|$
    (we discuss how this is chosen later);
    $T:=M T\left(A_{\epsilon}, T_{\epsilon}^{\prime}\right) ;$
    if $|T|=|M|$
    then
        $T^{\prime}:=T ;$
```

```
        $\epsilon$ min $:=\epsilon$;
    else
        $\epsilon$ max $:=\epsilon ;$
    endif
end;
```

Complete transversal for permutation (needed if matrix is structurally singular).
$M$ is a maximum transversal for $\boldsymbol{A}$, and hence $|M|$ is the required cardinality of the bottleneck transversal $T^{\prime}$ that is to be computed. If $\boldsymbol{A}$ is nonsingular, then $|M|=n$. Throughout the algorithm, $\epsilon \max$ and $\epsilon \min$ are such that a maximum transversal of size $|M|$ does not exist for $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon \text { max }}$ but does exist for $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon \text { min }}$. At each step, $\epsilon$ is chosen in the interval ( $\epsilon$ min, $\epsilon$ max), and a maximum transversal for the matrix $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$ is computed. If this transversal has size $|M|$, then $\epsilon \min$ is set to $\epsilon$; otherwise, $\epsilon \max$ is set to $\epsilon$. Hence, the size of the interval decreases at each step and $\epsilon$ will converge to the bottleneck value. After termination of the algorithm, $T^{\prime}$ is the computed bottleneck transversal and $\epsilon$ the corresponding bottleneck value. The value for $\epsilon$ is unique. The bottleneck transversal $T^{\prime}$ usually is not unique.

Algorithm BT makes use of algorithms for finding a maximum transversal. The currently known algorithm with best asymptotic bound for finding a maximum transversal is by Hopcroft and Karp [14]. It has a worst-case complexity of $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{n} \tau)$, where $\tau$ is the number of entries in the matrix. An efficient implementation of this algorithm can be found in Duff and Wiberg [11]. The depth-first search algorithm implemented by Duff [7] in the Harwell Subroutine Library code MC21 has a theoretically worst-case behavior of $\mathcal{O}(n \tau)$, but in practice it behaves more like $\mathcal{O}(n+\tau)$. Because this latter

[^1]algorithm is far simpler, we concentrate on this in the following, although we note that it is relatively straightforward to modify and use the algorithm of Hopcroft and Karp [14] in a similar way.

A limitation of Algorithm BT is that it maximizes only the smallest value on the diagonal of the permuted matrix. Although this means that the other diagonal values are no smaller, they may not be maximal. Consider, for example, the $3 \times 3$ matrix

$$
\left(\begin{array}{ccc}
\delta & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
1.0 & \delta & \\
& & \delta
\end{array}\right)
$$

with $\delta$ close to zero. Algorithm BT applied to this matrix returns $\epsilon=\delta$ and either transversal $\{(1,1),(2,2),(3,3)\}$ or $\{(2,1),(1,2),(3,3)\}$. Clearly, the latter transversal is preferable. The modifications that we propose help to do this by choosing large entries when possible for the early transversal entries.

It is beneficial to first permute the matrix to block triangular form and then to use BT only on the blocks on the diagonal. This can be done since all entries in any maximum transversal must lie in these blocks. Furthermore, not only does this mean that BT operates on smaller matrices, but we also usually obtain a transversal of better quality inasmuch as not only is the minimum diagonal entry maximized but this is true for each block on the diagonal. Thus, for matrix (2.2) the combination of an ordering to block triangular form followed by BT would yield the preferred transversal $\{(2,1),(1,2),(3,3)\}$.

There are other possibilities for improving the diagonal values of the permuted matrix which are not the smallest. One is to apply a row scaling subsequent to an initial column scaling of the matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$. This will increase the numerical values of all the nonzero entries in those rows for which the maximum absolute numerical value is less than 1 . A row scaling applied to the matrix (2.2) changes the coefficient $a_{33}$ from $\delta$ to 1.0 , and now Algorithm BT will compute $\{(2,1),(1,2),(3,3)\}$ as the bottleneck transversal of the matrix (2.2). Unfortunately, such a row scaling does not always help, as can be seen by the matrix

$$
\left(\begin{array}{ccc}
\delta & 1.0 & 1.0 \\
1.0 & \delta & \\
1.0 & & \delta
\end{array}\right)
$$

with the maximum transversals $\{(1,1),(2,2),(3,3)\}, \quad\{(2,1),(1,2),(3,3)\}$, and $\{(1,3),(2,2),(3,1)\}$, all legitimate bottleneck transversals. Indeed, the BT algorithm is very dependent on scaling. For example, the matrix $\left(\begin{array}{ll}1 & 2 \\ 3 & 4\end{array}\right)$ has bottleneck transversal $\{(2,1),(1,2)\}$ whereas, if it is row scaled to $\left(\begin{array}{ll}4 & 8 \\ 3 & 4\end{array}\right)$, the bottleneck transversal is $\{(1,1),(2,2)\}$.

Another possibility for improving the size of the diagonal values is to apply Algorithm BT repeatedly. Without loss of generality, suppose that, after application of BT, entry $a_{n n}$ has the smallest diagonal value. Algorithm BT can then be applied to the $(n-1) \times(n-1)$ leading principal submatrix of $\boldsymbol{A}$, and this could be repeated until (after $k$ steps) the $(n-k) \times(n-k)$ leading principal submatrix of $\boldsymbol{A}$ contains only 1 s (on the assumption that the original matrix was row and column scaled). Obviously, this can be quite expensive, since Algorithm BT is applied $\mathcal{O}(n)$ times although we have a good starting point for the BT algorithm at each stage. We call this algorithm the successive bottleneck transversal algorithm. Because of this and because we have found that it usually gives little improvement over BT, we do not consider it further in this paper.
2.3. Maximum product transversals. An algorithm yielding the same transversal independent of scaling is to maximize the product of the moduli of entries on the diagonal, that is, to find a permutation $\sigma$ so that

$$
\left|\prod_{i=1}^{n} a_{i \sigma_{i}}\right|
$$

is maximized. This is the strategy used for pivoting in full Gaussian elimination by Olschowka and Neumaier [16] and corresponds to obtaining a weighted bipartite matching. Olschowka and Neumaier [16] combine a permutation and scaling strategy. The permutation, as in (2.3), maximizes the product of the diagonal entries of the permuted matrix. (Clearly the product is zero if and only if the matrix is structurally singular.) The scaling transforms the matrix into a so-called $\boldsymbol{I}$-matrix, whose diagonal entries are all 1 and whose off-diagonal entries are all less than or equal to 1 .

Maximizing the product of the diagonal entries of $\boldsymbol{A}$ is equivalent to minimizing the sum of the diagonal entries of a matrix $\boldsymbol{C}=\left(c_{i j}\right)$ that is defined as follows (we here assume that $\boldsymbol{A}=\left(a_{i j}\right)$ denotes an $n \times n$ nonnegative nonsingular matrix):

$$
c_{i j}= \begin{cases}\log \bar{a}_{j}-\log a_{i j}, & a_{i j} \neq 0 \\ 0, & a_{i j}=0\end{cases}
$$

where $\bar{a}_{j}=\max _{k}\left(a_{k j}\right)$ is the maximum absolute value in column $j$ of matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$.
Minimizing the sum of the diagonal entries can be stated in terms of an assignment problem and can be solved in $\mathcal{O}\left(n^{3}\right)$ time for full $n \times n$ matrices or in $\mathcal{O}(n \tau \log n)$ time for sparse matrices with $\tau$ entries. A bipartite weighted matching algorithm is used to solve this problem. Applying this algorithm to $\boldsymbol{C}$ produces vectors $u, v$ and a transversal $T$, all of length $n$, such that

$$
\begin{cases}u_{i}+v_{j}=c_{i j}, & (i, j) \in T, \\ u_{i}+v_{j} \leq c_{i j}, & (i, j) \notin T .\end{cases}
$$

If we define

$$
\begin{array}{ll}
\boldsymbol{D}_{1}=\operatorname{diag}\left(d_{1}^{1}, d_{2}^{1}, \ldots, d_{n}^{1}\right), & d_{i}^{1}=\exp \left(u_{i}\right) \\
\boldsymbol{D}_{2}=\operatorname{diag}\left(d_{1}^{2}, d_{2}^{2}, \ldots, d_{n}^{2}\right), & d_{j}^{2}=\exp \left(v_{j}\right) / \bar{a}_{j}
\end{array}
$$

then the scaled matrix $\boldsymbol{B}=\boldsymbol{D}_{1} \boldsymbol{A} \boldsymbol{D}_{2}$ is an $\boldsymbol{I}$-matrix. We do not do this scaling in our experiments; unlike Olschowka and Neumaier, we use a sparse bipartite weighted matching, whereas they considered only full matrices.

The worst-case complexity of this algorithm is $\mathcal{O}(n \tau \log n)$. This is similar to BT, although in practice it sometimes requires more work than BT. We have programmed this algorithm, without the final scaling. We have called it algorithm MPD (for maximum product on diagonal) and compare it with BT and MC 21 in the later sections of this paper. Note that on the matrix

$$
\left(\begin{array}{ccc}
2 / \epsilon & & 1 \\
& 2 / \epsilon & \\
1 & & \epsilon
\end{array}\right)
$$

the MPD algorithm obtains the transversal $\{(1,1),(2,2),(3,3)\}$ whereas, for example, for Gaussian elimination down the diagonal the transversal $\{(1,3),(2,2),(3,1)\}$ would be better. Additionally, the fact that scaling does influence the choice of bottleneck transversal could be deemed a useful characteristic.
3. Implementation of the BT algorithm. We now consider implementation details of Algorithm BT from the previous section. We will also illustrate its perfor- mance on some matrices from the Harwell-Boeing Collection [8] and the collection of Davis [5]. A code implementing the BT algorithm will be included in a future release of the Harwell Subroutine Library [15].

When we are updating the transversal at stage ( ★) of Algorithm BT we can easily accelerate the algorithm described in section 2 by computing the value of the minimum entry of the transversal, viz.

$$
\min _{(i, j) \in T}\left|a_{i j}\right|
$$

and then setting $\epsilon$ min to this value rather than to $\epsilon$. The other issue, crucial for efficiency, is the choice of $\epsilon$ at the beginning of each step. If, at each step, we choose $\epsilon$ close to the value of $\epsilon$ min, then it is highly likely that we will find a maximum transversal, but the total number of steps required to obtain the bottleneck transversal can be very large. In the worst case, we could require $\tau-n$ steps when the number of nonzero entries in $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$ reduces by only one at each iteration.

The algorithm converges faster if the size of the interval ( $\epsilon \min , \epsilon \max$ ) reduces significantly at each step. It therefore would appear sensible to choose $\epsilon$ at each step so that the interval is split into two almost-equal subintervals, that is, $\epsilon \approx (\epsilon \min +\epsilon \max ) / 2$. However, if most of the nonzero values in $\boldsymbol{A}$ that have a magnitude between $\epsilon$ min and $\epsilon$ max are clustered near one of these endpoints, the possibility exists that only a few nonzero values are discarded and the algorithm again will proceed slowly. To avoid this, $\epsilon$ should be chosen as the median of the nonzero values between $\epsilon$ min and $\epsilon$ max.

We now consider how a transversal algorithm like MC21 can be modified to implement Algorithm BT efficiently. Before doing this, it is useful to describe briefly how MC21 works. Each column of the matrix is searched in turn (called an original column) and either an entry in a row with no transversal entry currently in the row is found and this is made a transversal entry (a cheap assignment), or there is no such entry and so the search moves to a previous column whose transversal entry is in one of the rows with an entry in the original column. This new column is then checked for a cheap assignment. If one exists, then this cheap assignment and the entry in the original column in the row of the old transversal entry replace that as transversal entries, thereby extending the length of the transversal by 1 . If there is no cheap assignment, the search continues to other columns in a depth-first search fashion until a chain or augmenting path of the form

$$
\left\{\left(a_{j_{1}, j}\right),\left(a_{j_{1}, j_{2}}\right),\left(a_{j_{3}, j_{2}}\right), \ldots,\left(a_{i, j_{k}}\right)\right\}
$$

is found, where there are no transversal entries in row $i$ and every even member of the path is a transversal entry. The assignment is made in column $j$ and the transversal is extended by 1 by replacing all transversal entries in the augmenting path with the odd members of this path.

Transversal selection algorithms like MC21 do not take into account the numerical values of the nonzero entries. However, it is clear that Algorithm BT will converge faster if $T$ is chosen so that the value of its minimum entry is large. We do this by noting that, when constructing an augmenting path, there are often several candidates for a cheap assignment or for extending the path. MC21 makes an arbitrary choice and we have modified it so the candidate with largest absolute value is chosen. Note
that this is a local strategy and does not guarantee that augmenting paths with the highest values will be found.

The second modification aims at exploiting information obtained from previous steps of Algorithm BT. Algorithm BT repeatedly computes a maximum transversal $T=M T\left(A_{\epsilon}, T_{\epsilon}^{\prime}\right)$. The implementation of MC21 in the Harwell Subroutine Library computes $T$ from scratch, so we have modified it so that it can start with a partial transversal. This can be achieved easily by holding the set of columns which contain entries of the partial transversal and performing the depth search through that set of columns.

Of course, there are many ways to implement the choice of $\epsilon$. One alternative is to maintain an array $P T R$ (of length $\tau$ ) of pointers, such that the entries in the first part of $P T R$ point to those entries in $\boldsymbol{A}$ that form matrix $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon_{\text {max }}}$, the first two parts of $P T R$ point to the entries that form $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon_{\text {min }}}$, and the elements in the third part of $P T R$ point to all the remaining (smaller) entries of $\boldsymbol{A}$. A new value for $\epsilon$ can then be chosen directly ( $\mathcal{O}(1)$ time) by picking the numerical value of an entry that is pointed to by an element of the second part of $P T R$. After the assignment in Algorithm BT to either $\epsilon_{\text {min }}$ or $\epsilon_{\text {max }}$, the second part of $P T R$ has to be permuted so that $P T R$ again can be divided into three parts. An alternative is to do a global sort (using a fast sorting algorithm) on all the entries of $\boldsymbol{A}$, such that the elements of $P T R$ point to the entries in order of decreasing absolute value. Then again $P T R$ can be divided into three parts as described in the previous alternative. By choosing (in $\mathcal{O}(1)$ time) $\epsilon$ equal to the numerical value of the entry pointed to by the median element of the second part of $P T R, \epsilon$ will divide the interval $\left(\epsilon_{\text {min }}, \epsilon_{\text {max }}\right)$ into parts of close-to-equal size. Both alternatives have the advantage of being able to choose the new $\epsilon$ quickly, but they require $\mathcal{O}(\tau)$ extra memory and (repeated) permutations of the pointers.

We prefer an approach that is less expensive in memory and that matches our transversal algorithm better. Since MC21 always searches the columns in order, we facilitate the construction of the matrices $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$, by first sorting the entries in each column of the matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ by decreasing absolute value. For a sparse matrix with a well-bounded number of entries in each column, this can be done in $\mathcal{O}(n)$ time. The matrix $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$ is then implicitly defined by an array LEN of length $n$ with LEN $[j]$ pointing to the first entry in column $j$ of matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$ whose value is smaller than $\epsilon$, which is the position immediately after the end of column $j$ of matrix $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$. Since the entries of a column of $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$ are contiguous, the repeated modification of $\epsilon$ by Algorithm BT, which redefines matrix $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon}$, corresponds to simply changing the pointers in the array LEN.

The actual choice of $\epsilon$ at phase ( $\star$ ) in Algorithm BT is done by selecting in matrix $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon_{\text {min }}}$ an entry that has an absolute value $X$ such that $\epsilon_{\text {min }}<X \leq \epsilon_{\text {max }}$. The columns of $\boldsymbol{A}_{\epsilon_{\text {min }}}$ are searched until such an entry is found and $\epsilon$ is set to its absolute value. This search costs $\mathcal{O}(n)$ time since, for each column, we have direct access to the entries with absolute values between $\epsilon_{\text {min }}$ and $\epsilon_{\text {max }}$ through the pointer array LEN.

As mentioned before, by choosing $\epsilon$ carefully we can speed up Algorithm BT considerably. Therefore, instead of choosing an arbitrary entry from the matrix to define $\epsilon$, we can choose a number ( $k$, say) of entries lying between $\epsilon_{\text {min }}$ and $\epsilon_{\text {max }}$ at random, sort them by absolute value, and then set $\epsilon$ to the absolute value of the median element. ${ }^{2}$ In our implementation we used $k=10$.

[^2]Table 3.1
Times for transversal algorithms. The order of matrix is $n$ and the number of entries is $\tau$.
| Matrix | $n$ | $\tau$ | Time in secs |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  |  |  | MC21 | BT | MPD |
| MAHINDAS | 1258 | 7682 | 0.01 | 0.01 | 0.02 |
| ORANI678 | 2529 | 90158 | 0.02 | 0.10 | 0.13 |
| RDIST1 | 4134 | 94408 | 0.02 | 0.18 | 0.37 |
| GEMAT11 | 4929 | 33185 | 0.01 | 0.03 | 0.04 |
| GOODWIN | 7320 | 324784 | 0.27 | 2.26 | 1.82 |
| ONETONE1 | 36057 | 341088 | 2.67 | 0.70 | 0.61 |
| ONETONE2 | 36057 | 227628 | 2.63 | 0.53 | 0.42 |
| TWOTONE | 120750 | 1224224 | 60.10 | 6.95 | 2.17 |
| LHR02 | 2954 | 37206 | 0.04 | 0.14 | 0.17 |
| LHR14C | 14270 | 307858 | 0.28 | 1.13 | 3.32 |
| LHR71C | 70304 | 1528092 | 1.86 | 9.00 | 37.73 |
| AV41092 | 41092 | 1683902 | 35.72 | 10.81 | 65.13 |


The set of matrices that we used for our experiments are unsymmetric matrices taken from the sparse matrix collections [9] and [5]. Table 3.1 shows the order, number of entries, and time to compute a bottleneck transversal for each matrix. All matrices are initially row and column scaled. By this we mean that the matrix is scaled so that the maximum entry in each row and in each column is 1 .

The machine used for the experiments in this and the following sections is a 166 MHz Sun ULTRA-2. The algorithms are implemented in Fortran 77.
4. The solution of equations by direct methods. MCSPARSE, a parallel direct unsymmetric linear system solver developed by Gallivan, Marsolf, and Wijshoff [13], uses a reordering to identify a priori large- and medium-grain parallelism and to reorder the matrix to bordered block triangular form. Their ordering uses an initial nonsymmetric ordering that enhances the numerical properties of the factorization, and subsequent symmetric orderings are used to obtain a bordered block triangular matrix [19]. The nonsymmetric ordering is effectively a modified version of MC21. During each search phase, for both a cheap assignment and an augmenting path, an entry $a_{i j}$ is selected only if its absolute value is within a bound $\alpha, 0 \leq \alpha \leq 1$, of the largest entry in column $j$. Instead of taking the first entry that is found by the search that satisfies the threshold, the algorithm scans all of the column for the entry with the largest absolute value.

The algorithm starts off with an initial bound $\alpha=0.1$. If a maximum transversal cannot be found, then the values in each column are examined to determine the maximum value of the bound that would have allowed an assignment to take place for that column. The new bound is then set to the minimum of the bound estimates from all the failed columns and the algorithm is restarted. If a bound less than a preset limit is tried and a transversal is still not found, then the bound is ignored and the code finds any transversal. In our terminology (assuming an initial column scaling of the matrix) this means that a maximum transversal of size $n$ is computed for the matrix $\boldsymbol{A}_{\alpha}$.

In the multifrontal approach of Duff and Reid [10], later developed by Amestoy and Duff [2], an analysis is performed on the structure of $\boldsymbol{A}+\boldsymbol{A}^{T}$ to obtain an ordering that reduces fill-in under the assumption that all diagonal entries will be numerically suitable for pivoting. The approximate minimum degree (AMD) algorithm

Table 4.1
Number of delayed pivots in factorization from MA41. A dash indicates that MA41 requires a real working space larger than 25 million words (of 8 bytes).
| Matrix | Transversal algorithm used |  |  |  |
| :--- | ---: | ---: | ---: | ---: |
|  | None | MC21 | BT | MPD |
| GEMAT11 | - | 76 | 0 | 0 |
| ONETONE1 | - | 16261 | 255 | 100 |
| ONETONE2 | 40916 | 8310 | 214 | 100 |
| GOODWIN | 536 | 1622 | 358 | 53 |
| LHR02 | 3432 | 388 | 211 | 56 |
| LHR14C | - | 7608 | 3689 | 169 |
| LHR71C | - | 35354 | - | 2643 |
| AV41092 | - | 10151 | 2143 | 1730 |


Table 4.2
Number of entries in the factors from MA41.
| Matrix | Transversal algorithm used |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | None | MC21 | BT | MPD |
| GEMAT11 | - | 127819 | 78589 | 78161 |
| ONETONE1 | - | 10359161 | 6957229 | 4715085 |
| ONETONE2 | 14082683 | 2875603 | 2167523 | 2169903 |
| GOODWIN | 1263104 | 2673318 | 1791112 | 1282004 |
| LHR02 | 2298550 | 333450 | 394724 | 235048 |
| LHR14C | - | 3111142 | 4596028 | 2164392 |
| LHR71C | - | 18786982 | - | 11599556 |
| AV41092 | - | 16226036 | 15140098 | 14110336 |


of Amestoy, Davis, and Duff [1] is used to obtain the ordering to reduce the fill-in. The numerical factorization is guided by an assembly tree. At each node of the tree, some steps of Gaussian elimination are performed on a dense submatrix whose Schur complement is then passed to the parent node in the tree where it is assembled (or summed) with Schur complements from the other children and original entries of the matrix. If, however, numerical considerations prevent us from choosing a pivot then the algorithm can proceed, but now the Schur complement that is passed to the parent is larger and usually more work and storage will be needed to effect the factorization.

The logic of first permuting the matrix so that there are large entries on the diagonal, before computing the ordering to reduce fill-in, is to try to reduce the number of pivots that are delayed in this way, thereby reducing storage and work for the factorization. We show the effect of this in Table 4.1, where we can see that even using MC21 can be very beneficial although the BT algorithm can show significant further gains, and sometimes the use of MPD can cause further significant reduction in the number of delayed pivots. We should add that the numerical accuracy of the solution is sometimes slightly improved by these permutations and, in all cases, good solutions were found.

In Table 4.2, we show the effect of this on the number of entries in the factors. Clearly this mirrors the results in Table 4.1 and shows the benefits of the transversal selection algorithms. This effect is seen in Table 4.3, where we can sometimes observe a dramatic reduction in time for solution when preceded by a permutation. In all

Table 4.3
Time (in seconds on Sun ULTRA-2) for MA41 for solution of system.
| Matrix | Transversal algorithm used |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | None | MC21 | BT | MPD |
| GEMAT11 | - | 0.28 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| ONETONE1 | - | 225.71 | 83.11 | 44.22 |
| ONETONE2 | 81.45 | 17.05 | 9.48 | 11.54 |
| GOODWIN | 3.64 | 14.63 | 6.00 | 3.56 |
| LHR02 | 24.85 | 1.07 | 1.29 | 0.58 |
| LHR14C | - | 12.66 | 29.17 | 5.88 |
| LHR71C | - | 148.07 | - | 43.33 |
| AV41092 | - | 226.20 | 184.68 | 155.70 |


cases, an AMD ordering has been used on the permuted matrix.
In addition to allowing selection of the pivots chosen by the analysis phase, the multifrontal code MA41 will do better on matrices whose structure is symmetric or nearly so. The transversal orderings in some cases increase the symmetry of the resulting reordered matrix. This is particularly apparent when we have a very sparse system with many zeros on the diagonal. In that case, the reduction in number of off-diagonal entries in the reordered matrix has an influence on the symmetry. Notice that, in this respect, the more sophisticated transversal algorithms may actually cause problems since they could reorder a symmetrically structured matrix with a zero-free diagonal, whereas MC21 will leave it unchanged.
5. The solution of equations by iterative methods. A large family of iterative methods, the so-called stationary methods, has the iteration scheme

$$
\boldsymbol{M} \boldsymbol{x}^{(k+1)}=\boldsymbol{N} \boldsymbol{x}^{(k)}+\boldsymbol{b},
$$

where $\boldsymbol{A}=\boldsymbol{M}-\boldsymbol{N}$ is a splitting of $\boldsymbol{A}$ and $\boldsymbol{M}$ is chosen such that a system of the form $\boldsymbol{M} \boldsymbol{x}=\boldsymbol{y}$ is easy to solve. If $\boldsymbol{M}$ is invertible, (5.1) can be written as

$$
\boldsymbol{x}^{(k+1)}=\boldsymbol{M}^{-1} \boldsymbol{N} \boldsymbol{x}^{(k)}+\boldsymbol{M}^{-1} \boldsymbol{b}=\left(\boldsymbol{I}-\boldsymbol{M}^{-1} \boldsymbol{A}\right) \boldsymbol{x}^{(k)}+\boldsymbol{M}^{-1} \boldsymbol{b} .
$$

We have

$$
\rho\left(\boldsymbol{M}^{-1} \boldsymbol{N}\right) \leq\left\|\boldsymbol{M}^{-1} \boldsymbol{N}\right\|_{\infty} \leq\left\|\boldsymbol{M}^{-1}\right\|_{\infty}\|\boldsymbol{N}\|_{\infty},
$$

where $\rho$ is the spectral radius, so that if $\left\|\boldsymbol{M}^{-1}\right\|_{\infty}\|\boldsymbol{N}\|_{\infty}<1$, convergence of the iterates $\boldsymbol{x}^{(k)}$ to the solution $\boldsymbol{A}^{-1} \boldsymbol{b}$ is guaranteed for arbitrary $\boldsymbol{x}^{(0)}$. In general, the smaller $\left\|\boldsymbol{M}^{-1}\right\|_{\infty}\|\boldsymbol{N}\|_{\infty}$, the faster the convergence. Thus an algorithm that makes entries in $\boldsymbol{M}$ large and those in $\boldsymbol{N}$ small should be beneficial.

The simplest method of this type is the Jacobi method, corresponding to the splitting $\boldsymbol{M}=\boldsymbol{D}$ and $\boldsymbol{N}=-(\boldsymbol{L}+\boldsymbol{U})$, where $\boldsymbol{D}$ denotes the diagonal, $\boldsymbol{L}$ the strictly lower triangular part, and $\boldsymbol{U}$ the strictly upper triangular part of the matrix $\boldsymbol{A}$. However, this is not a particularly current or powerful method so we conduct our experiments using the block Cimmino implementation of Arioli et al. [3], which is equivalent to using a block Jacobi algorithm on the normal equations. In this implementation, the subproblems corresponding to blocks of rows from the matrix are solved by a direct method similar to that considered in the previous section. For similar reasons, it can

Table 5.1
Number of iterations of block Cimmino algorithm on MAHINDAS.
| Acceleration + \# block rows | Transversal algorithm |  |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  | None | MC21 | BT | MPD |
| CG(1) |  |  |  |  |
| 2 | 324 | 267 | 298 | 295 |
| 4 | 489 | 383 | 438 | 438 |
| 8 | 622 | 485 | 532 | 524 |
| 16 | 660 | 572 | 574 | 574 |
| CG(4) |  |  |  |  |
| 2 | 148 | 112 | 130 | 133 |
| 4 | 212 | 190 | 199 | 194 |
| 8 | 261 | 235 | 232 | 233 |
| 16 | 281 | 245 | 253 | 253 |
| CG(8) |  |  |  |  |
| 2 | 80 | 62 | 72 | 75 |
| 4 | 117 | 105 | 109 | 108 |
| 8 | 140 | 133 | 127 | 130 |
| 16 | 151 | 142 | 137 | 136 |


be beneficial to increase the magnitude of the diagonal entries through unsymmetric permutations.

We show the effect of this in Table 5.1, where we see that the number of iterations for the solution of the problem MAHINDAS ( $n=1258, \tau=7682$ ). The convergence tolerance was set to $10^{-12}$. The transversal selection algorithm was followed by a reverse Cuthill-McKee algorithm to obtain a block tridiagonal form. The matrix was partitioned in 2, 4, 8, and 16 block rows and the acceleration used was a block CG algorithm with block sizes of 1,4 , and 8 .

In every case, the use of a transversal algorithm accelerates the convergence of the method, sometimes by a significant amount. However, the use of the algorithms to increase the size of the diagonal entries does not usually help convergence further. The convergence of block Cimmino depends on angles between subspaces which are not so strongly influenced by the diagonal entries.
6. Preconditioning. In this section, we consider the effect of using a permutation induced by our transversal algorithms prior to solving a system using a preconditioned iterative method. We consider preconditionings corresponding to incomplete factorizations of the form $\operatorname{ILU}(0)$, $\operatorname{ILU}(1)$, and ILUT and study the convergence of the iterative methods GMRES(20), BiCGSTAB, and QMR. We refer the reader to a standard text like that of Saad [18] for a description and discussion of these methods. Since the diagonal of the permuted matrix is "more dominant" than the diagonal of the original matrix, we would hope that such permutations would enhance convergence.

We show the results of some of our runs in Table 6.1. The maximum number of iterations was set to 1000 and the convergence tolerance to $10^{-9}$. It is quite clear that the reorderings can have a significant effect on the convergence of the preconditioned iterative method. In some cases, the method will converge only after the permutation; in others it greatly improves the convergence. It would appear from the results in Table 6.1 and other experiments we have performed that the more sophisticated MPD transversal algorithm generally results in the greatest reduction

Table 6.1
Number of iterations required by some preconditioned iterative methods.
| Matrix and method |  | Transversal algorithm |  |  |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
|  |  | MC21 | BT | MPD |
| IMPCOL E |  |  |  |  |
| ILU(0) | GMRES(20) | - | 16 | 15 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | 123 | 21 | 11 |
|  | QMR | 101 | 26 | 17 |
| ILU(1) | GMRES(20) | 59 | 15 | 11 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | 98 | 16 | 8 |
|  | QMR | 72 | 19 | 12 |
| ILUT | GMRES(20) | 8 | 7 | 8 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | 9 | 5 | 5 |
|  | QMR | 10 | 8 | 8 |
| MAHINDAS |  |  |  |  |
| ILU(0) | GMRES(20) | - | - | 179 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | - | - | 39 |
|  | QMR | - | - | 55 |
| ILU(1) | GMRES(20) | - | - | 69 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | - | - | 26 |
|  | QMR | - | - | 34 |
| ILUT | GMRES(20) | - | - | 15 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | - | - | 11 |
|  | QMR | - | - | 17 |
| WEST0497 |  |  |  |  |
| ILU(0) | GMRES(20) | - | 60 | 19 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | - | 78 | 22 |
|  | QMR | - | 63 | 23 |
| ILU(1) | GMRES(20) | - | 79 | 15 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | - | 82 | 15 |
|  | QMR | - | 82 | 18 |
| ILUT | GMRES(20) | - | 15 | 10 |
|  | BiCGSTAB | - | 15 | 7 |
|  | QMR | - | 17 | 12 |


in the number of iterations, although the best method will depend on the overall solution time including the transversal selection algorithm.
7. Conclusions and future work. We have described algorithms for obtaining transversals with large entries and have indicated how they can be implemented showing that resulting programs can be written for efficient performance.

While it is clear that reordering matrices so that the permuted matrix has a large diagonal can have a very significant effect on solving sparse systems by a wide range of techniques, it is somewhat less clear that there is a universal strategy that is best in all cases. We have thus started experimenting with combining the strategies mentioned in this paper and, particularly for the block Cimmino approach, with combining our unsymmetric ordering with a symmetric ordering. One example that we plan to study is a combination with the symmetric TPABLO ordering [4].

It is possible to extend our techniques to orderings that try to increase the size of not just the diagonal but also the immediate sub and super diagonals and then use
the resulting tridiagonal part of the matrix as a preconditioner.
One can also build other criteria into the weighting for obtaining a bipartite matching, for example, to incorporate a Markowitz count so that sparsity would also be preserved by the choice of the resulting diagonal as a pivot.

Finally, we noticed in our experiments with MA41 that one effect of transversal selection was to increase the structural symmetry of unsymmetric matrices. We are thus exploring further the use of ordering techniques that more directly attempt to increase structural symmetry.

Acknowledgments. We are grateful to Patrick Amestoy, Michele Benzi, and Daniel Ruiz for their assistance with the experiments on the direct methods, the preconditioned iterative methods, and the block iterative methods, respectively. We would also like to thank Alex Pothen for some early discussions on bottleneck transversals and John Reid and Jennifer Scott for comments on a draft of this paper.

## REFERENCES

[1] P. R. Amestoy, T. A. Davis, and I. S. Duff, An approximate minimum degree ordering algorithm, SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl., 17 (1996), pp. 886-905.
[2] P. R. Amestoy and I. S. Duff, Vectorization of a multiprocessor multifrontal code, Internat. J. Supercomputer Appl., 3 (1989), pp. 41-59.
[3] M. Arioli, I. Duff, J. Noailles, and D. Ruiz, A block projection method for sparse matrices, SIAM J. Sci. Statistical Comput., 13 (1992), pp. 47-70.
[4] M. Benzi, H. Choi, and D. Szyld, Threshold ordering for preconditioning nonsymmetric problems, in Proc. Workshop on Scientific Computing '97, Hong Kong, G. H. Golub, ed., Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York, 1997, pp. 159-165.
[5] T. A. Davis, University of Florida Sparse Matrix Collection, http://www.cise.ufl.edu/~davis, ftp://ftp.cise.ufl.edu/pub/faculty/davis (1997).
[6] I. S. Duff, MA28-A Set of Fortran Subroutines for Sparse Unsymmetric Linear Equations, Tech. report AERE R8730, Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, UK, 1977.
[7] I. S. Duff, The design and use of a frontal scheme for solving sparse unsymmetric equations, in Numerical Analysis, Proc. 3rd IIMAS Workshop, Lecture Notes in Math. 909, J. P. Hennart, ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, New York, pp. 240-247.
[8] I. S. Duff, R. G. Grimes, and J. G. Lewis, Sparse matrix test problems, ACM Trans. Math. Software, 15 (1989), pp. 1-14.
[9] I. S. Duff, R. G. Grimes, and J. G. Lewis, Users' Guide for the Harwell-Boeing Sparse Matrix Collection (Release I), Tech. report RAL 92-086, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Oxon, UK, 1992.
[10] I. S. Duff and J. K. Reid, The multifrontal solution of indefinite sparse symmetric linear systems, ACM Trans. Math. Software, 9 (1983), pp. 302-325.
[11] I. S. Duff and T. Wiberg, Remarks on implementation of $\mathcal{O}\left(n^{1 / 2} \tau\right)$ assignment algorithms, ACM Trans. Math. Software, 14 (1988), pp. 267-287.
$[12]$ D. Fulkerson, I. Glicksberg, and O. Gross, A Production Line Assignment Problem, Tech. report RM-1102, Rand Corporation, 1953.
[13] K. A. Gallivan, B. A. Marsolf, and H. A. G. Wijshoff, Solving large nonsymmetric sparse linear systems using MCSPARSE, Parallel Comput., 22 (1996), pp. 1291-1333.
[14] J. E. Hopcroft and R. M. Karp, An $n^{(5 / 2)}$ algorithm for maximum matchings in bipartite graphs, SIAM J. Comput., 2 (1973), pp. 225-231.
[15] HSL, Harwell Subroutine Library. A Catalogue of Subroutines (Release 12), AEA Technology, Harwell Laboratory, Oxfordshire, UK, 1996.
[16] M. Olschowka and A. Neumaier, A new pivoting strategy for Gaussian elimination, Linear Algebra Appl., 240 (1996), pp. 131-151.
[17] A. Pothen and C. Fan, Computing the block triangular form of a sparse matrix, ACM Trans. Math. Software, 16 (1990), pp. 303-324.
[18] Y. Saad, Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems, PWS Publishing, New York, 1996.
[19] H. A. G. Wijshoff, Symmetric Orderings for Unsymmetric Sparse Matrices, Tech. report CSRD 901, Center for Supercomputing Research and Development, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, 1989.


[^0]:    *Received by the editors February 28, 1997; accepted for publication (in revised form) by J. Liu January 9, 1998; published electronically July 9, 1999.
    http://www.siam.org/journals/simax/20-4/31766.html
    ${ }^{\dagger}$ Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0QX, UK (isd@rl.ac.uk).
    ${ }^{\ddagger}$ CERFACS, 42 Ave. G Coriolis, 31057 Toulouse Cedex, France (koster@cerfacs.fr). Current address: Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0QX, UK.

[^1]:    ${ }^{1}$ The term bottleneck has been used for many years in assignment problems, for example [12].

[^2]:    ${ }^{2}$ This is a technique commonly used to speed up sorting algorithms like quicksort.

